#Formal Usability Study Plans

*Hypothesis: We believe that an icon featured navigation bar, as opposed to a word featured navigation bar, will not only help remove clutter but help users find their way more quickly.*
We’ve decided to conduct an A/B test focused on the use of iconography in the navigation bar of our website. We hypothesize that using icons instead of words will be a more effective communicative measure, as our users may have pre-existing familiarity with these icons from other sites, according to Jakob's Law of User Experience. This law states that, since users spend most of their time on other sites, they would prefer an application to work in a similar way to those that they already have previous experience with. When selecting our icons, we tried to select “universal” icons (though these are very rare) or icons that were logically connected to their corresponding page. Our primary focus when selecting these icons was to limit the amount of interpretation users had to do themselves. Using icons over words can also reduce visual clutter and give the navigation a more sleek, aesthetically-pleasing, and minimalistic design–#8 of Jakob Nielsen's 10 Usability Heuristics for User Interface design, which states that interfaces should avoid containing unnecessary or irrelevant information. We decided to focus on this heuristic, in particular, as we received several critiques on our cluttered visual design during the Heuristic Evaluation Assignment.

Our experiment will use two pages from our site: “About” and “Job Listings.” These pages have two distinct navigation bars (one is while the user is logged out, the other is after they log in), so we can test one user’s reaction to words or icons on the “About” page navigating to the “Log In” page, and test their reaction to the other on “Job listings” navigating to “Find.” We will maintain every other facet of our site, such as aesthetics and content, the same. We will measure response time as a dependent variable, and whichever format (either words or icons) has the lowest average response time is the direction we’ll follow. Our hypothesis dictates that using icons should result in a lower response time. 

Ideally we would be able to test 1-2 people per icon/word pair, but the number of users subject to our A/B test is a function of availability. Assuming a surplus of study participants, each person would receive a random landing page, either “About” or “Job Listings,” and be asked to navigate to the corresponding destination page of our designation. To control for biased results, we would ask the participant to close their eyes prior to starting the test. We would then ask the participant to open their eyes and measure the time it takes for them to reach their destination page. This is particularly punishing if someone clicks the wrong link, but would be very illustrative of ambiguous iconography. Every participant would then perform a second round on the landing page that they hadn’t received previously, with the opposite signifiers (words or icons) that they received to navigate in their last trial.

We recognize that regardless of whether a participant uses the navigation bar with icons or words first, their first encounter with the website will likely take longer due to unfamiliarity. We will make sure to correct for this in our analysis.

